# Dying on the Inside: Investigation of Female Deaths in U.S. Prisons
#### by Alexandra Thursland, Noelle Garrick, Sydney Ballard, Alexandra Doss, and Katherine Beltz

## Overview
This repository contains my final project for CS 216: Everything Data, F22. Over the course of 8 weeks, my team and I conducted a data science project investigating deaths in the U.S. carceral system, and specifically differences between the circumstances of men and women dying.

## Introduction
The United States is home to the largest prison population in the world. With 1.2 million people serving sentences in state and federal jails, 10 million admissions annually to county prisons and 4 million on probation or parole, our nation is experiencing a pandemic that long predates Covid-19: incarceration. 
Those impacted by incarceration are disproportionately low-income people of color, the majority of whom are sentenced for non-violent offenses. This trend reinforces systemic racial inequity, creating a vicious feedback loop of disenfranchisement, widened wealth gaps and recidivism. Despite its enormous prison population, the United States is relatively unsafe by western standards—ranked 47 in the world for safety, according to U.S. News. 
Following the murder of George Floyd and the subsequent wave of demonstrations that gripped the country in summer 2020, there has been a renewed public interest in addressing police brutality and incarceration—two intimately linked issues. In the 2022 midterm election, cash bail reform was a prominent and contentious issue. With political tensions on the rise, incarceration is at the forefront of many Americans minds.
A particular issue regarding the incarceration crisis in the United States is inmates dying in custody. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, the number of deaths that occur in prisons has risen steadily over the years, from 3,170 in 2001 to 4,513 in 2018. The growth in prison deaths outpaces the growth in prison populations themselves: the mortality rate in U.S. prisons in 2018 (355 for every 100,000 incarcerated people) was the highest ever recorded. 
An often-overlooked demographic among prison populations is women. From 1980 to 2020, the number of women incarcerated in the United States skyrocketed by 475%. The same racial disparities that exist among incarcerated men show up among incarcerated women as well: Black women are 1.7 times more likely to be incarcerated than white women, and Latinx women are 1.3 times more likely to be incarcerated.
It is at the intersection of these two nuances of incarceration—deaths in custody, and the unique experiences of women in prison—where we found our research question: 

**RESEARCH QUESTION: How do incarcerated female deaths differ from incarcerated male deaths in the United States?**

Our research question is relevant because the incarceration crisis, deaths in prisons, misogyny, and the intersection of all three are regrettably ignored and unexplored. Individually, these three issues have been at the forefront of the American culture war and political discourse for several years—but from our research, it appears that little research has been done into this specific niche. Incarcerated women represent a doubly disadvantaged demographic that likely have significantly different incarceration experiences from men. With the resurgence of social movements that explicitly target incarceration and rehabilitation, investigating the differences in experience on the basis of gender within prison facilities remains a relevant part of the discussion. In this report, we aim to use our technical skills as data scientists to demystify the facts around incarcerated female deaths. 
